I Definitions of Causation Relations

A. Definition of Relations
We will assume that a "Relation" holds between "factor 1" and
"factor 2" and there usually is a "functor" that licenses this
relationship, although in a small number of carefully defined cases
allow relations without an explicit set of ords that act as functor.
The functor-less cases will be defined by some carefully defined
grammatical context.

We assume the following classes:

+Cause

Factor 1 causes Factor 2
or
Factor 1 allows Factor 2 to happen
or
Factor 1 increases the likelihood of Factor 2
or
Factor 1 is a precondition of Factor 2
or
Factor 1 is a partial cause of Factor 2
or
Factor 1 is a possible cause of Factor 2 (all the above modified by
might, may, will, is possible, etc.)

Crucially, Factor1 and Factor2 must be events (see definitions of
factors).  Thus the sense of "cause" here is similar to the one in
logic.  We are specifically not marking cases of "blame" where a
person or entity is Factor1.

+Before-After
Factor 1 occurs/occurred/will occur before Factor 2
and the conditions for +Cause are not met

-Cause

Is marked for 2 sentences that occur one after another, but should not
be labeled as +Cause or +Before-After

Examples of + Cause
There was an earthquake. Consequently there were 500 deaths.
500 people died because there was an earthquake
There was an earthquake and 500 people died.
There was an earthquake.  500 people died.
The evil scientist exploded a bomb in the Andreas fault to trigger an earthquake.
(Note that "The evil scientist exploded a bomb in the Andreas fault"
is Factor1 (an event), not "The evil scientist" (not an event))

Examples of +Before-After

The baby could swim before it could walk
(factor1 = the baby could swim, factor2 = it could walk)

The duck left after the geese left
(factor1 = the geese left, facto2 = the duck left)

The duck left. Then the geese left.
The duck has already left. The geese are leaving.

B. Definition of Factors: Factors can be sentences or noun phrases
playing the above roles. Further specifications are below.

1. Factors can be sentences as follows:
     * a full sentence (ending in a period)
     * one of two clauses connected by a subordinate or cordinate
        conjunction
     * a main clause and one of the specifically defined instances of
        a subordinate clause without a functor.  We will include the
	following subcases:
	- a purpose clause -- this is an infinitival
	   clause (we will assume the functor is "to") that
	   has a function corresponding to a purpose, e.g.,
	   "They rented a car to drive to Florida"
	   (+Cause Factor1 = They rented a car, Factor2 = to drive to Florida)
	- a subjectless "-ing" clause that modifies a sentence, e.g.,
	  They dumped the dough on the table, making a mess
	  (+Cause Factor1 = They dumped the doe on the table, Factor2 = making a mess)

If each factor is  a full sentence (ending in a period) or one
of two clauses connected by a subordinate or cordinate conjunction, we
will label this Relation +Discourse to indicate that it is a
"discourse" instance of a causal relation.

2. Factors can be noun phrases, provided that the noun phrase
represents an event.  We assume that event noun phrases are ones that
"occur" at specific times or during specific time spans ("The party
occurred before the meeting").  We assume that noun phrases
representing calendar dates are not markable factors. For example, the
following sentences would not be markable: "He bought the duck before
December 25.", "She bought the duck after Christmas."  In particular,
we will assume that Holidays ("Christmas") and other nouns that can be
ambiguous between events and dates are to be interpreted as dates, and
thus are not part of markable event relations. We are specifically not
marking cases of blame ("John caused the earthquake") and are more
focussing on the logical definition of cause ("John set off a bomb,
causing an earthquake", in which the "John set off a bomb" event is
the cause.)

Some causal relations with noun phrase factors should be marked
-Discourse and some should be marked +Discourse.  This is determined
soley by the functor (see next section).  If one or more factor of a
causal relation is an noun phrase and the functor is a subordinate
conjunction, that causal relation is +Discourse, otherwise it is
-Discourse.  I will define "discourse connective" in the next section.

C. Definition of Functor -- we will currently allow the following
kinds of functors, words or small phrases that link the 2 factors
together.

1. Functors connecting sentences

Subordinate/coordinate conjunction -- Closed class word that connects
clauses together within a full sentence (because, if, before, after,
then, so, since, but, or, and).  These are all instances of discourse
connectives when they link sentences together. Many of these words
(before, after, since) can also be prepositions, specifying an NP's
role in a sentence, e.g., "They danced after the party."  We will
assume that these words are also discourse functors in cases when the
object of the preposition is an event noun phrase.

Discourse adverb -- adverb that connects one full sentence with a
prevous sentence (therefore, next, consequently). These are discourse
connectives as well.

Temporal Noun Phrase -- temporal NP that compares a current sentence
(temporally) with a previous one, e.g., "The next day".  These are
discourse connectives when they link 2 sentnces in this way.

TO -- infinitival "to" can be marked as a functor for purpose clauses,
e.g., "She sung the alphabet song backwards TO confuse me."  (as noted
in the previous section this is also a case of a discourse
connective).

NONE -- There are the following cases (both +Discourse)

     two consecutive sentences can be in +BEFORE-AFTER or +CAUSE
     relations without any functor, e.g., "He woke up early. He was
     first in line."

     a subjectless "-ing" clause that modifies a sentence, e.g.,
     They dumped the dough on the table, making a mess
      (+Cause Factor1 = They dumped the doe on the table, Factor2 = making a mess)

      All -CAUSE relations have NONE as a functor.

2. Functors connecting noun phrases.  Functors that connect noun
phrase can be verbs, e.g., "[The earthquake] CAUSED [lots of
destruction]" (caused) or other nouns (typically nominalizations),
e.g., "The RESULT of [the one hour long earthquake] was [lots of
destruction]". They can also be prepositions (such as the ones already
described) or adjectives: "Increased condensation is due to higher
temperatures."  Remember, we are limiting noun phrase arguments to
"event nouns", where we define "events" as phrases that "occur during
specific time spans".  This can include some "states" (which are often
contrasted to events) like "higher temperatures" because our
definition only requires that they "occur during specific timespans".
We are specifically ruling out physical entities like people and thus
distinguishing cause from blame.

We will only mark causal relations with NP arguments as +DISCOURSE if
the functor is a member of the class of discourse connectives
(subordinate conjunctions), e.g., "The temperature rose BEFORE the
ducks arrived."

D. The Attribution Phrase

As per the Penn Discourse Treebank guidelines, it is permitted for
attribution information to be ignored by a (discourse) relation.  An
attribution phrase states who says, thinks, shouts, etc. the content
of a sentence.

Ex:  The glass fell. Therefore, John said that it broke.
   Type: Cause-Effect
    Factor One: The glass fell
    Factor Two: it broke
    Functor: Therefore

Note: "John said" represents the attribution information. Note that
this is usually ignored by the relation.

II Format specifications assumed in annotated_sampling_100.txt

A) The task is to find 2 sentences linked by a +CAUSE or +BEFORE-AFTER
     relation.  We will call these sentences: FACTOR1 and FACTOR2.  We will
     assume that FACTOR1 causes or precedes FACTOR2.

B) Candidate sentences can be:
   i) 2 consecutive matrix sentences
   ii) 2 sentences connected with a coordinate conjunction (and, but, or, as well as, ...)
   iii) A matrix sentence and a subordinate clause that it contains, the latter
         being introduced by a subordinate conjunction (before, after, because, if, ....).
	 For purposes of discussion we will assume that one factor is
	 the matrix sentence with the subordinate clause removed and
	 the other factor is the subordinate clause with the
	 subordinate conjunction removed.  For purposes of scoring, we may only
	 require the "head" of each factor to be correct.

C) The annotation marks items that GLARF annotated as +CAUSE if 
      FACTOR1 causes or partially causes FACTOR2.  X causes Y if:
      	      (a) Y logically follows from X or
	      (b) X occurs before Y and Y results from or partially results from X

D) The annotation marks items  as +BEFORE-AFTER if FACTOR1
      occurs before FACTOR2

E) The annotation marks items as -CAUSE if both C and D do not hold.

F) The current annotation is limited to sentence pairs that GLARF
     marks as something.

III. GLARF Output
We are working on a active learning machine learning system to
annotate cases of causation.  We are hoping to use statistical
information to select more likely seeds to annotate.

We are currently detecting  3 relation types between discourse arguments (or consecutive sentences):

BEFORE-AFTER
+CAUSE
-CAUSE

For each possible instance of these relationships, we are recording
the following informaiton in tsv files of file type .cause

1) Offset
2) Tree-number
3) relation type -- Labels from the list [BEFORE-AFTER, CAUSE-EFFECT, PARTIAL-CAUSE-EFFECT]
     Note that in manual annotation, CAUSE-EFFECT & PARTIAL-CAUSE-EFFECT were combined.
4) functor -- the word that triggers the causal or before-after  relation
5) Factor1
6) Factor2
7) The head of factor1 -- in the case
   of a conjoined structure, this can be a list inside of parentheses.
8) The head of factor2 -- ditto
9) confidence -- a manual score based on the rule names
10) Rule Type: Label from the list: AFTER, BEFORE, CAUSE, PURPOSE, RESULT
       In principle, BEFORE(X,Y) and AFTER(Y,X) are   equivalent.
11) PARTIAL or NIL -- PARTIAL if the relation is
      based on conjoined structures and NIL otherwise.  In cases of
      CAUSE, this may indicate contributing factors.
12) The "important" words from factor1.  A word is important if: it is
      the head word or the head of an "important" argument.  The words
      are separated by "||". Details are provided below.

13) The importand words from factor2.

Important words are the heads of phrases and select arguments.
Surface phrases are included, but not logical phrases (we do not
include "missing subjects", etc.). If a head is "transparent", we
select the underlying head and ignore the transparent case.  For
example, in the phrase "A variety of airplanes", we would include
"airplanes", but not "variety".  Most closed class words (auxilliary
verbs, modals, prepositions, etc.) are excluded from inportant
words,as well.  Similarly, copulas are ignored.  For example, from the
phrase "is angry at ducks", "angry||ducks" would be extracted.  For
pre-nominal modifiers, nouns are selected, but only "technical"
adjectives are selected.  For example, from "the big orthopedic foot
massager", we would extract "orthopedic||foot||massager" because "big"
is not a technical adjective, "orthopedic" is a technical adjective,
"foot" is a noun pre-modifier and "massager" is the head noun.  For
"patterns" and named entities, we substitute the words for classes
containing asterisks. For example, "41" would be "*NUMBERP* and "The
US National Institutes of Health" would be subsituted for
"*NAME*||*ORGANIZATION*"
